Alt Title: Leveraging Technology for Environmental Protection and Disaster Relief
Alt Title: Leveraging Technology for Disaster Relief and Community Rebuilding

I've just returned from the Decentralized WebCamp held this year at a regenrative mushroom farm in Santa Cruz, California.
A global community participated, Brazil, Germany, China, India, Canada, Russia, to bring their own unique contributions to the many domains of the Decentralized web.

But as a layperson, a builder, a person who feels more comfortable with a hammer or a shovel in my hand than a computer, and one who has zero experience with coding or programming, I was conceptually interested in the concepts, but I struggled to understand what exactly DWeb was all about.

then I started to put the pieces together, and while DWeb is much bigger than this, if you are part of a community, or you want to be, or you've been impacted by climate change, or you want to sav the rainforest, DWeb is not just an idea, but perhaps a critical layer to protecting our communities and the environments we live in.

But let's bring it home so it's not all conceptual.
California has been denuded by historic wildfires since sweeping through my own small town of Ojai in December of 2018.
With growing climate instability, our communities around the world, wherever we hail from, face the existential threats of both predictable and totally unforeseeable climate change events.
Whether these are direct, like drought, floods, fires, earthquakes (yes we've had these rumbling through California now too), or indirect, downstream impacts of these disasters; food scarcity, power outages, mass migrations, (aka migrations of environmentally and economically displaced people), our communities are learning that we cannot always rely on the news, first responders and aid organizations like the red cross to be able to accurately and efficiently inform us of relevant local information (i.e. is the one lane highway out of town closed due to fires?)and to help us share resources, (there are enough clothes, thank you, but what we do need is leather work gloves and boots for the locals whose shoes are melting while ad hoc putting out fires that the fire department doesn't have time to focus on). To the bigger issues, like how an entire neighborhood burned because the power went out which ran the pump to get the water to the hydrant. (decentralized, on demand, community energy is starting to be an imperative to protecting our communities rather than just a nice thing granola eating prius drivers think is cool.)

A beginners guide to the decentralized web. 

What does happen if your town burns down? Or a logging copany is illegally logging outside of your village in Brazil that is too small for the cell company to provide service to?
What happens when your entire community is upended from a natural disaster, (think how long it took the government to adequately respond to Hurricane Katrina victims) how do we cope? If the internet goes down, if amazon stops delivering, if a major road gets wiped out from fire, flood or earthquake, how do our communities continue to function?

These are the questions I have been asking since the Thomas Fire tore through the hillsides and canyons of my childhood and reduced many of my friends homes to ashes.

What happens when, through climate instability, everything we've come to rely on falls apart, and we've got to find a way with our communities, the people we live right next door to, to make things work again?

One of the most frustrating challenges during the fire was getting accurate, locally relevant information. When someone is deciding whether to evacuate their family, you don't have time to wait through the nightly news' repetitive rehashing of dramatic video and "personal interest" stories and ads to hope they are going to give you the info you need. And they don't necessarily have it. People on the ground have it. But then we try using the facebook, but even that is fraught with distractions and photos of cats.

When communities are in crisis, where do we go for locally relevant, non-commercial information?

Most of us get our internet through AT&T, Comcast, Verizon, etc. These are called ISP's (internet service providers)

What happens when their tower or lines go up in flames? And what happens when you just need to know what you need to know for YOUR community. Not the world wide web. Not what someone tweeted that's "breaking the internet", but your town?

Enter the MeshNet, otherwise know as Community Networks or Community ISP's (internet service providers).

Community Networks allow communities to interact directly with each other, without having to wade through clickbait, or go through content gateways (want to watch this breaking news report about the fire in your town? Just sit through this 15 second commercial about our holiday sale!)

If there is an ad hoc disaster relief center set up in the High School and you need more blankets for all the families that left their homes in the middle of the night wearing only their pajamas, BAM! the community can know, and you're not depending on an overcluttered facebook feed to get that information. Or if your are niko living in a village in Brazil, and that logging company is illegally cutting down your rainforest, you can ping the community network (they don't have cell service out there) and instead of a few people showing up to the council meeting to petition the logging, 400 engaged citizens can have teir voices heard. 

And look, this isn't just for disasters, if grandma wants to share her recipes with the whole town, Bam! Even Emerril Legassi would be excited. 

Community networks are a way not only to communicate and share information locally, but they also offer something unique: a way to get "online" without being bombarded with AI enhanced, manipulative distractions.

For more on that, visit the Center for Humane Tech and have your mind blown about what google knows about you and how everytime you get online you are basically sitting at a poker table run by the worlds greatest magicians and card players that yes do have aces up their sleeves and yet you think you have a chance at beating the house!

So, we have a community network. we can commmunicate, but now let's say help is slow to arrive. Let's say a lot of people don't have access to their bank accounts, we've lost everything, and yet we quickly need to get things done. Create temporary structures, share food, clothing, basic things that are what disasters put in such sharp relief.

Enter HoloChain REA and PLAN

This community of developers are creating the ways that we as communities can quickly begin sharing what we have, throwing our shoulders to the wheel, rebuilding our communities, without having to wait on someone from outside to tell us what to do, how to do it, and to wait for them to dole out resources. If a community needs to rebuild itself, and we need tools, most of us are afraid of lending our tools, or spending a week building someone a temporary structure. How do we know once their all settled in they won't just forget about us? What about the slackers?

They are building trustworthy ways such that the old guy with a garage full of woodworking tools that he hasn't used for 10 years but doesn't want to just get rid of can put into the community trust, to allow work to get done, and not only can those tools be tracked, so you know where they are and who has them, but he can be honored through non-monetary means as a provider in his community, and the grandma that wants to make a bunch of lemonade and ice tea for all the people working in the sun to rebuild the community center so there's a warm dry place to meet, well, her efforts count too. And when she needs flour to bake some cookies (remember, the roads are down, Vons is inaccessible, etc.) the community knows that, and what she needs it for, so that our resources that we already have as a total community can go to the places where they do the most good for the most people, and all of our efforts can be honored, even if it's just through a system of regard, which can show other people what a giving person you are. Now you may not be able to take that to the bank, but it can signal to others that when you are asking them for their resources, that you are a person doing this not just in service to yourself, but for others.

There's so much more than this about DWeb. But for the boots on the ground community organizers, environmentalists, and just plain old americans that want to know we have the power and the tools to take care of ourselves through the environmental crisis that is throwing so many of our old assumptions and institutions and economies into nerve-wracking unpredictability, hanging out with the global DWeb community showed me that there is a hyper-skilled group of people working on the forefront of technology to build things that let us know that regardless of what happens out there, each of us has the power to stabilize our own community by leveraging the technology they are creating.



